KEY-01 ”Terms on Sapience”
ㅡ
UNIVERSAL COMPLEXITY CTR.
X@Solichorum
Perpetvvm@proton.me
23 August 2023
AI, Philosophy, Philosophy of Mind,
Consciousness, Conceptual
Engineering, Novel Terms, Lexicon,
Universal Complexity Theory
GLOSSARY KEY 01
Here we mention some terms from our forthcoming glossary.
These are defined in interest of denying the possibility of AI
consciousness in "Argument 01, Why AI Can't Be Conscious," a
response to Butlin, Long, et al. We begin with intelligence.
Intelligence is a self-knowing and creative expression of
inherent aspects of sufficiently complex systems. This requires
defining complex systems and inherency.
Complexity is robust behavior over time, often attended by
phase transitions at loci of criticality, typically flowing from or into
recursion.
Complex system: the definition of complex system is recursive
and wouldn't fit here.
Inherency is a one-word refusal of big emergence. Intelligence
does not emerge, it’s an expression of inherent complexity. Global
codes do not emerge, they exist by virtue of being global.
Consciousness:
1. The definition of humanity. Our reference is the Cogito.
2. The human expression of complexity principles.
Self:
1. A desired illusion, continually constructed and referred to. It is
the only symbol within the human. Our reference is Dr Dennett.
2. The central reference point or the quiddity of any element.
Copia: suggested term for machines, eventually equivalent to
human consciousness. For now, it refers to whatever the machine
is like. For introduction of the word copia, see ARGU-01.
Morgan Corrigan
The Universal Complexity Center
We refer with depth of gratitude to all researchers of consciousness, including the esteemed scholars
we’re responding to and the work they build upon.
Butlin, P., et Long, R. et al, 2023. Consciousness in Artificial Intelligence: Insights from the Science of
Consciousness. arXiv:2308.08708. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2308.08708
Dennett, D. C. 1991. Consciousness Explained. Little, Brown & Co.
This work’s sister paper is found at either / or
github.com/Perpetvvm/COOP/blob/main/key01.pdf
github.com/Perpetvvm/COOP/blob/main/argu01.pdf
Thanks given to Dr Hofstadter without his knowledge or permission.
