 
COGNITION, PSYCHOLOGY, MODELING  | THE COOPERATIVE 17 AUG 2023
VALENT POTENTIAL
VP/EO: A HUMAN MANIFOLD FOR MANY SPHERES

Presented Realm: decision-making

In our explorations, cognitive elements of favor, attention, and judgment (high or low) exhibit frequent co-occurrence and inseparability. We interpret this as evidence of a coherent manifold, allowing dimensional reduction - an immeasurably valuable operation.

NB: The authors use both "I" and "we." This is intended to not to muddle but clarify.

↭

The source is simplicity. In decision modeling, it's easiest to start with postfactism: looking at choices already made. To simplify further, we reduce the multidimensional world of decision-making processes within a system to an exclusive binary - yes/no and other situations where one option precludes the other. This reduction to utile and ultimate simplicity by analyzing previous binary decisions provides consequential foundation for analysis.

From this simplified and meaningful (hence, fecund) starting point, we arrive at our goal: a novel equation with a novel field that brings recently engineered concepts into focus. This allows direct integration among works alluded to here, as well as harmonizing with other corners of our multidisciplinary endeavors.

Those forthcoming mathematizations strengthen confidence in the value of VP and EO by tying them to the concrete. VP represents Valent Potential/Potentiality - the latent possibility space for valuation. EO signifies Executive Orientation - the emergent directionality of planning and action.
↭
Experiential description of beginnings.
The conception of VP/EO gave prompt benefit in disparate spheres. That production, as well as human instinct about the imagined value of our findings, led to prediction of corresponding frustration during VP/EO development. At that point, I would have described the nascent something like the following.

"At any time, from any level of sophistication, you can react to an element within your world. You can make a decision. Many of those decisions are yes-no, toward-away. Whenever you're confronted with a new element, you have a degree of favor, attention, and tentative or considered judgment toward it. That potential is a trigger that can be pulled when desired--or not desired".

I saw it metaphorically as potential energy. Further, in cooperative phenomenological analyses of the author's cotidian decisionmaking, we interpreted rationally our feelings of that leaning or slant, toward or away any element. Reason alone was required to accept VP and EO as two yoked elements.

Then, as portended, some stymieing. For a period, we shifted efforts from VP expansion to explore unrelated potentialities. But VP stayed firmly in our conceptual toolbox. It wasn't long before we found trailhead to mathematical novelty. Even more quickly, we spied the equation could be tied to our Valent Potential. This invigorating discovery led us to reprioritize and intensify our efforts once again on VP/EO. In the ensuing time--a week and change since the mathematical discovery--some of our farflung and less-prioritized explorations seem to become clarified and connected.

We'll be releasing the technical paper when the needed places are set. We're excited to share it. The equation within the forthcoming has a simple, pleasing check:

A = VP * EO

That means: Action equals valent potentiality times executive orientation.

Finally, a restatement of definitions.

Valent Potential (VP): The latent possibility space for valuation, representing a predisposition or inclination to make certain decisions. It reflects the potential energy attending a possible decision, embodying a leaning toward or away from something based on favor or disfavor.

Executive Orientation (EO): The emergent directionality of planning and action, translating the valent potential into tangible choices or actions. It signifies the process by which the potential inclination is transformed into a concrete decision or action.
